===========
Open Design
===========

In the previous section we established the concept of Open Community, which
requires transparency in every step of creating and maintaining artifacts;
Open Design is an essential part of this.

In order to provide access to everyone to all steps and decision points of the
design process, no one person, group of people or organization can maintain
control over the project.

It is a common practice for companies to develop software in-house and then
release the code as open source and start to form a community around it. As
part of their actions on the way they often fail with letting go of the control
over the software and processes within the community. This can easily result in
a single-vendor community as the leadership positions and decisions are mainly
controlled by this organization and therefore other contributors cannot take
ownership and feel as being equally involved in the community.

Single-vendor projects don't have a good reputation as both the design
directions and maintenance are highly dependent on the controlling organization
which puts high risk on the project for users and other companies to depend on
it. At the same time contributors, who are not part of that one company, can't
feel to be equal members if they don't have the option to be involved in all
steps and decisions, which will discourage them from participating.

By opening up the design process for everyone to participate in and have their
voices heard, you will get more innovative ideas and more robust solutions.

On the other hand, you need to be aware that opening up the design and decision
making process to a larger group can slow down to come to consensus in some
cases. However, by electing leaders from the community and by the community
based on merit, you can ensure that the decisions will always reflect and
represent the community, whether the contributors made them or their elected
leaders. While the decision making process might still be longer than in case
of a smaller group, it is a tradeoff that will benefit the whole community on
the long run.

The community also needs to ensure that the processes and timelines they use
are clearly defined and made available for anyone to access publicly without
any restrictions. This will ensure that both newcomers and established
contributors know how they can participate, when and where decisions are made
and will make it easier for them to participate and help improving and
maintaining the project.

To provide you an example, we will discuss the approach the OpenStack community
took with their release process.

The Open Design Principle in Practice
-------------------------------------

Open Design involves to define the lifecycle of the software development
process, which boils down to define a release process to be able to evolve and
maintain the project artifacts. A release process defines the "when", "where"
and "how" the design process happens.

To define the "when", you need to define a release cadence to put out new
versions of the software and related items, such as documentation. To make this
step more complicated, you need to decide between a feature-based or a
time-based release model.

With the former approach, the community needs to identify a set of features
that needs to be complete in order to be able to cut a release. In most cases
this results in the inability to provide a good estimate on when the new
version of the artifacts will be available. With delays in the estimated
delivery time, users will likely look for alternatives after some time as it
is harder to plan downstream with this model. A larger community with a more
complex structure will likely have a hard time to commit to a set of
functionality and coordinate the steps needed to deliver them as estimated.
However, projects with a higher number of external dependencies or with a
larger refactoring activity this option can still be something to consider even
if only on a temporary basis.

A time-based release model commits to a release cycle and adapts the
development process to ensure to produce stable and reliable software and
artifacts on time. This model has a lot of advantages compared to the previous
one in case of open source communities of any size. Most importantly, it gives
predictability which is important for those who depend on the release
downstream as well as to those who are participating in the community. In
addition, it also makes it easier for newcomers to start participating in your
community, as they can identify which phase of the release cycle the community
is going through and that makes it easier for them to find a task or activity
to start to contribute. This model provides a higher level of transparency with
being able to define deadlines for processes throughout the cycle.

This approach makes it a little harder to commit, when it comes to features and
functionality. The community will prioritize work items and will include the
items that are ready by the time of the release. In some cases a feature might
only get partially complete and users need to wait until the next release to be
able to use it. While this can be inconvenient, by looking at the roadmap for
the project you can still get a good picture about when you get new
functionality that you need. If a feature is important to you, you can also
always decide to participate in the making, if you are not doing so yet.

In addition, time-based release cycles provide you and the community the
ability to plan events and activities, like hackathons around the cadence to
boost the planning phase, bug fixing or share news and updates with those
who are interested or new to the project.

While choosing time-based release process is not a criteria of the Open Design
principle, it is a more natural choice to create good dynamics for a community
with processes that are easy to discover and follow.

The OpenStack community chose this model and has been practicing it
successfully since the launch of the project. The community picked a 6-month
release cadence as that fits best to the size and complexity of the project.
The community gathers at the beginning of every release cycle, either in person
or virtually, to provide an environment for more efficient discussions that can
help with faster planning and better maintenance. The events are open to
everyone to participate, let them be contributors, users, new comers, and so
forth.

In order to remain inclusive to those who cannot participate in an event the
community avoids making decisions at these events. Contributors rather making
meeting notes available and share thoughts and proposals on the mailing list
and other channels to provide an opportunity to engage in the discussion to
those who didn't have access to the event.
